so we're going to make an all-in-one
sponge now just to show you how easy it
is first of all nice big roomy Bowl
because you want to get air in and then
four ounces of self-raising flour sifted
into the bowl holding the sieve up nice
and high again so that you can get
plenty of air into the flour as it goes
down into the bowl this flower has also
got a teaspoon full of baking powder in
with it and although it's self raising
flour for an all-in-one sponge
you need to have baking powder as well
you need a bit of extra raising paddle
power now I've got 4 ounces of soft
margarine and this is what makes it
possible to do it all in one this soft
tub type of margarine
then I've got 4 ounces of castor sugar
and 4 sponges and for most cakes you
need a fine texture so do always use
castor sugar then two eggs block and
they go see how easy it is and now a
little bit of vanilla essence you can of
course use other flavorings like orange
peel lemon peel coffee essence cocoa but
I'm just going to use a little bit of
vanilla essence in this particular
sponge then again because I don't
believe in working too hard
I go to whip it with an electric hand
whisk but if you haven't got one you can
do it with a wooden spoon doesn't make
any difference
so you just whisk all those ingredients
together really it's quicker to make
this sponge cake than to actually go
down to the shops and buy one if you're
new to making sponges you'll probably
find that recipes often say mix to a
dropping consistency so I just like to
show you what a dropping consistency is
it's when you pick the mixture up and
you just tap it on the side of the bowl
and it should drop off fairly easily I
thought that was a little bit heavy so
I'm going to just add a little bit more
liquid and that is going to be warm
water dessert spoonful now some people
use milk I find warm water gives a
lighter texture now let's just mix that
in and hey presto we should now have a
good dropping consistency yes much
better
that's mixture is now ready to go into
the sponge tins and that's divided
between two sponge tins and now I just
like to give you one or two tips about
the tins first of all you can see that
these are nonstick tins and I think
that's a very good thing but sometimes
they do stick so what I'm going to do is
just take a piece of margarine on some
kitchen paper and just lightly grease
the tins so that I've taken that extra
precaution and spongey sometimes stick
to the base so I'm going to line the
bases with this which is silicone paper
now it'll take you an extra minute to
cut out two pieces of silicone paper
which by the way is better than grease
proof paper a bit more expensive but
very reliable and it's just worth that
extra trouble and then I'm just going to
grease that again because then you'll
never have any problems with your
sponges sticking now they're ready to go
in the oven or they will be when they're
filled and that's gas mark 3 325 degrees
Fahrenheit and now I want to give you
one very important tip that's right for
the whole of cake May
and that is why you shouldn't open the
oven door whilst a cake is cooking I'm
going to explain that now it's the air
bubbles trapped in the mixture which
determine the final shape and texture of
your cake as the heat of the oven
penetrates the air will expand and the
cake Rises the important point is that
the cake develops its rigid structure
starting around the edge where the heat
penetrates first then slowly working
towards the middle now if the oven door
is open too early the cold air suddenly
lowers the temperature the air in the
cake will stop expanding and actually
contracts particularly in the middle
where it isn't yet firm so the number
one rule is don't be too inquisitive go
away be strong don't look in the oven
until three-quarters of the way through
the cooking time